<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
    <head>
        <title>Antiindividualistic Individuality: Anarchism’s Legacy</title>
        <link href="../style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    <body>
        <article>
            <h1>Antiindividualistic Individuality: Anarchism’s Legacy</h1>
            <figure>
                <blockquote>
                    <p>
                        “The new man will find himself only when the warfare
                        between the collective and the individual ceases. Then
                        we shall see the human type in its fullness and
                        splendor.”
                    </p>
                </blockquote>
                <figcaption>— Henry Miller, The Time of the Assassins</figcaption>
            </figure>
            <p>
                There can be no critique of the prevailing bourgeois-capitalist
                ideology without a critique of modern individualism. For it is
                modern individualism that leads us to perceive ourselves as the
                sole masters of our destiny, thrown into this world only to see
                to our own personal benefit. Under these ideological conditions
                we find ourselves united with others only in the abstract entity
                of the state. This allows the state to take control over us,
                that is, our lives and our spirits. Our “freedom” is reduced to
                the war of all against all over social, political, and economic
                resources, in other words: over power. We end up as subjects to
                the state, and as enemies to our brothers and sisters, while we
                flatter ourselves to be “autonomous” from everything that
                surrounds us — a destructive concept in itself. This is the
                situation that modern individualism has put as in. In order to
                overcome the state and capital, this situation has to be
                overcome as well.
            </p>
            <p>
                This does not mean, however, that we can do without a theory of
                individuality. For even if the
                individual<sup><a id="fnref:one" href="notes.xhtml#one">1</a></sup>
                reinvents its identity as a collective being, it doesn’t explain
                what the individual’s role in the collective will
                be.<sup><a id="fnref:two" href="notes.xhtml#two">2</a></sup>
                Put differently, in the aspired collective forms of living,
                questions about individuality won’t disappear. To the contrary:
                reflecting upon the social significance of individuality will be
                of great importance both for the collective to function and for
                the individuals to make valuable contributions. In short,
                individuality is a vital aspect of making antiindividualistic
                communities possible.
            </p>
            <p>
                As much as the collective will define the roles of the
                individuals, the individuals will define the collective. African
                scholar Fodé Diawara wrote in 1972: “The strong sense of
                community, characteristic for the ‘primitive mentality’
                (something no anthropologist can seriously deny) is not based on
                instinct. It is first and foremost the result of ongoing
                reflection within both the individual and ‘primitive’ social
                structures.”<sup><a id="fnref:three" href="notes.xhtml#three">3</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                We need to distinguish between the following: when individuals
                live in a collective web, they blend into it, but they don’t
                dissolve in it. It is a dangerous misconception to believe that
                in an antiindividualistic society individuals will cease to
                exist. Rather, the individual will have special value for the
                community, which thrives on people’s individuality. This is why
                an antiindividualistic community does not need no concept of
                individuality, but an antiindividualistic
                one.<sup><a id="fnref:four" href="notes.xhtml#four">4</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                Unfortunately, this distinction is not always made in critical
                theory. People tend to cling to the bourgeois separation of the
                individual and society. In this framework, any
                antiindividualistic effort will consist of taking society’s
                side. This, however, only means to flip the same coin upside
                down. When alternative forms of individuality replace
                individualism, alternative forms of collectivity will have to
                replace the state. While the individual and society reinforce
                each other as the ideological basis of the bourgeois-capitalist
                state, we are looking for individuality and collectivity beyond
                the state and the modern individual.
            </p>
            <p>
                The social significance of individuality unfolds in communities
                that do not know of the individual vs. society dichotomy. There,
                individuals to come to life in the collective, just as the
                collective comes to life in the individuals. In other words,
                individuality can only unfold its social value where there is
                constant interaction on one and the same social terrain.
            </p>
            <p>
                Leftist theory often disregards the necessity of alternative
                concepts of individuality. Sometimes because the problem isn’t
                taken seriously, and sometimes because of the assumption that it
                will solve itself in a socialist society. This is one of the
                reasons why leftist notions of collectivity can get stuck in
                abstract utopianism without much practical relevance (in the
                best case), or lead to totalitarian regimes (in the worst).
            </p>
            <p>
                It’d be unfair to accuse Karl Marx of “forgetting the
                individual.” Marx hoped for a liberation of the individual in
                communism. In the Economic-Philosophical Manuscripts he says:
                “We have to avoid juxtaposing the ‘society’ as an abstraction
                to the
                individual.”<sup><a id="fnref:five" href="notes.xhtml#five">5</a></sup>
                But his trust in historic necessity might have got in the way
                when it came to developing concrete concepts of individuality.
                Without such concepts, however, the individual will remain
                enslaved even when the means of production are in the hands of
                the masses.
            </p>
            <p>
                Marxism does not really offer a theory of alternative
                individuality.<sup><a id="fnref:six" href="notes.xhtml#six">6</a></sup>
                The following comment of a former German Red Army Faction
                guerilla seems revealing: “In the RAF we thought that we’d
                automatically change ourselves in the struggle for liberation,
                in the struggle for changing society’s objective conditions.
                This is certainly false. The personal struggle has to be part
                of any liberation
                struggle.”<sup><a id="fnref:seven" href="notes.xhtml#seven">7</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                In this context, it seems impossible not to pay tribute to the
                anarchists. The theory of classical anarchism might not be all
                that deep, but it drew the line to authoritarian socialism where
                it sensed the danger of abstract models of collectivization —
                which, despite Marx’s warnings, did develop in mainstream
                Marxist-Leninist ideology.
            </p>
            <p>
                The anarchists took an uncompromising and uncorruptible stand
                against this. Bakunin reminded us that “collective liberty and
                prosperity exist only so far as they represent the sum of
                individual liberties and
                prosperities.”<sup><a id="fnref:eight" href="notes.xhtml#eight">8</a></sup>
                Erich Mühsam said that “if the individualists, who see nothing
                but the independence of the individual, can’t see the forest for
                the trees, certain collectivists aren’t any better: all they see
                is the forest, and they refuse to realize that it consists of
                trees.”<sup><a id="fnref:nine" href="notes.xhtml#nine">9</a></sup>
                Diego Abado de Santillan optimistically predicted on the eve of
                the Spanish Revolution: “The eternal aspiration to be unique
                will be expressed in a thousand ways: the individual will not be
                suffocated by levering down. … Individualism, personal taste,
                and originality will have adequate scope to express
                themselves.”<sup><a id="fnref:ten" href="notes.xhtml#ten">10</a></sup>
                Errico Malatesta summarized the importance of individuality
                thus: “It is uncontested by anarchists that the real, concrete
                being, the being who has consciousness and feels, enjoys, and
                suffers, is the individual, and that society (far from being
                superior to the individual, far from seeing the individual only
                as an instrument and a slave) must be no more than the union of
                associated men and women for the greater good of
                all.”<sup><a id="fnref:eleven" href="notes.xhtml#eleven">11</a></sup>
                Malatesta believed that anarchists are “the militant custodians
                of liberty against all aspirants to power and against the
                possible tyranny of the
                majority.”<sup><a id="fnref:twelve" href="notes.xhtml#twelve">12</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                The following attempt to understand individuality as a social
                value (or, to outline this social value theoretically) is
                motivated by the conviction that a concept of individuality is
                crucial in our struggle for antiindividualistic forms of living.
                What follows is therefore the attempt to conceptualize an
                antiindividualistic individuality aiming “to rediscover a
                relation to oneself as a free
                individuality.”<sup><a id="fnref:thirteen" href="notes.xhtml#thirteen">13</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                It won’t be enough, of course, to stress concepts from
                Aristotle’s zoon politikon to Heidegger’s In-der-Welt-Sein as
                Mitsein (Being-in-the-World as Being-With), defining the human
                being as a per se “social being.” No one really questions this,
                and we are not pursuing abstract philosophical anthropology
                here,<sup><a id="fnref:fourteen" href="notes.xhtml#fourteen">14</a></sup>
                but rather concrete, practical ways of existence and related
                ethical principles. Whenever we’re faced with grand
                philosophical theory, we should recall the words of Bakunin:
                “Not that it is ignorant of the principle of individuality; it
                conceives it perfectly as a principle, but not as a
                fact.”<sup><a id="fnref:fifteen" href="notes.xhtml#fifteen">15</a></sup>
                We need to think of individuality as the radical materialistic
                manifestation of our
                uniqueness.<sup><a id="fnref:sixteen" href="notes.xhtml#sixteen">16</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                Individuality as a social value has nothing to do with the
                modern individual. The modern individual is a rigid entity,
                individuality a dynamic principle. These are opposites. While
                the modern individual stands for conformism and universalism,
                individuality stands for anticonformism and antiuniversalism.
                To quote Ralph Waldo Emerson: “Whoso would be a man, must be a
                nonconformist.”<sup><a id="fnref:seventeen" href="notes.xhtml#seventeen">17</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                Individuality is rated highly in antistatist collectives. It
                guarantees both the immanence and the permanence of social
                uniqueness. Timothy Leary illustrated this by saying:
                “Self-assured singularities … have been called mavericks, ronin,
                freelancers, independents, self-starters, nonconformists,
                oddballs, troublemakers, kooks, visionaries, iconoclasts,
                insurgents, blue-sky thinkers, loners, smart alecks … they have
                been variously labeled clever, creative, entrepreneurial,
                imaginative, enterprising, fertile, ingenious, inventive,
                resourceful, talented,
                eccentric.”<sup><a id="fnref:eighteen" href="notes.xhtml#eighteen">18</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                If we want to make use of the terminology offered by Gilles
                Deleuze and Félix Guattari, we could say that individuality is a
                precondition for molecular groups, which are characterized by
                diversity, vitality, and motion, while it is suppressed in the
                rigid, drab, and one-dimensional molar groups institutionalized
                by the
                state.<sup><a id="fnref:nineteen" href="notes.xhtml#nineteen">19</a></sup>
                Carlos Marighela wrote in the Minimanual of the Urban Guerrilla:
                “The characteristics of the urban guerilla are initiative,
                creativity, flexibility, diversity, and
                quick-wittedness.”<sup><a id="fnref:twenty" href="notes.xhtml#twenty">20</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                Individuality’s function in antistatist collectives can be
                summarized by seven points, outlining a concept of
                antiindividualistic individuality.
            </p>
            <p>
                1. To understand oneself as oneself, yet at the same time as an
                integral part of a collective, demands individual responsibility
                for the collective. If people live together not governed by the
                state but relying on principles that have been negotiated
                collectively, they can’t take their “personal rights” and lock
                themselves into a chamber. Instead, they will have to contribute
                actively to the survival of the group.
            </p>
            <p>
                Foucault talked about the polis in ancient Greece as a complex,
                pre-statist form of governance (even if reserved for a
                privileged minority): “The attitude of the individual to itself,
                the way in which it guards its freedom in relation to its
                desires, the sovereignty which it enacts upon itself, are
                constitutive elements of the happiness and order of the
                polis.”<sup><a id="fnref:twentyone" href="notes.xhtml#twentyone">21</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                A rigid social order requires passive individuals, while a
                vibrant social order requires active individuals. The social
                tasks that the bourgeois-capitalist order transfers to the state
                (education, health care, control of public space, conflict
                solution, etc.) must, in an antistatist collective, be met by a
                coordinated effort of individuals. The same is true for our
                economic tasks. This requires individuals willing to accept
                their social responsibility, ready to take on relevant tasks.
            </p>
            <p>
                In The Philosophy of Punk, Craig O’Hara summarized anarchy thus:
                “Anarchy does not simply mean no laws, it means no need for
                laws.”<sup><a id="fnref:twentytwo" href="notes.xhtml#twentytwo">22</a></sup>
                The fact that the state legitimizes itself by claiming that it
                is needed to administer collective life (allegedly, because the
                individuals are not capable of it) illustrates the revolutionary
                character of this principle. Fellow anarchist Alex Comfort has
                stated that “anarchism is that political philosophy which
                advocates the maximization of individual
                responsibility.”<sup><a id="fnref:twentythree" href="notes.xhtml#twentythree">23</a></sup>
                Crime novelist Léo Malet has identified anarchists thus:
                “Anarchists are those who try to think their own thoughts. They
                are special people, even the dumbest among them. They have
                something the ordinary citizen, the trained voter, doesn’t have:
                they are more original than a
                lamppost.”<sup><a id="fnref:twentyfour" href="notes.xhtml#twentyfour">24</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                Individual responsibility implies to always reflect upon one’s
                actions and to withstand fascist obedience. In the words of
                Ernst Bloch, “extinguished individuals deprived of
                responsibility” don’t just create “imbeciles but
                beasts.”<sup><a id="fnref:twentyfive" href="notes.xhtml#twentyfive">25</a></sup>
                Or, as an autonomous activist from Germany has put it: “If
                self-determination means to take on responsibility for
                consequences, it will create a different consciousness, making
                it impossible for people to act as pigs. Both the positive and
                negative effects of your actions will get back to
                you.”<sup><a id="fnref:twentysix" href="notes.xhtml#twentysix">26</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                2. Related to the notion of individual responsibility is the
                notion of self-respect. Only those able to see themselves as
                agents in the social arena (and not as remote-controlled clones
                of a frightening social machine) can develop a secure and
                positive self-image.
            </p>
            <p>
                Ethics play a role, of course. Bourgeois agents are agents, too,
                and they might develop a secure and positive self-image, too,
                but this will be based on the narcissistic self-satisfaction of
                people pursuing money and fame. It can make some people “proud,”
                but no true self-respect can come from this. Self-respect is
                necessary, however, if we don’t want to hide
                paranoically<sup><a id="fnref:twentyseven" href="notes.xhtml#twentyseven">27</a></sup>
                behind abstract identities — identities that allow us to
                compensate for feelings of inferiority by attacking those we
                perceive to be the weaker.
            </p>
            <p>
                Self-respect has nothing to do with arrogance. That’s for the
                bourgeoisie. When we speak of self-respect, we mean
                levelheadedness, calm, and
                sovereignty;<sup><a id="fnref:twentyeight" href="notes.xhtml#twentyeight">28</a></sup>
                essential values for people who desire to live in antistatist
                communities, in which antiindividualistic individuality
                flourishes.
            </p>
            <p>
                What follows are three references to the importance of
                self-respect. The rapper Ice-T once told the following story: “I
                asked Everlast, who raps with House of Pain, if he thought white
                people hate black people. … He doesn’t think white people hate
                black people, he just figures they’re afraid of them. … And the
                longer we live in the attitude that it’s cool to oppress people,
                the longer we’re going to be
                afraid.”<sup><a id="fnref:twentynine" href="notes.xhtml#twentynine">29</a></sup>
                Henry Rollins has said: “Anyone with real self-respect wouldn’t
                litter, wouldn’t steal, wouldn’t lie, wouldn’t fuck anyone else
                over. He wouldn’t do anything to anyone else he wouldn’t do to
                himself. When I respect myself, I don’t need to take out my pain
                or weakness on someone
                else.”<sup><a id="fnref:thirty" href="notes.xhtml#thirty">30</a></sup>
                And the Beastie Boys have rapped on Ill Communication: “We’re
                here to work it out in one way or another / to find a mutual
                respect for ourselves and one another / and the true key is a
                trust in self / for when I trust myself I fear no one
                else.”<sup><a id="fnref:thirtyone" href="notes.xhtml#thirtyone">31</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                3. From the Discover Yourself! inscribed in the temple walls at
                Delphi to Henry Rollins’s comment that “the more you know about
                yourself, certainly the less harm you’re going to do to other
                people,”<sup><a id="fnref:thirtytwo" href="notes.xhtml#thirtytwo">32</a></sup>
                there exists an important line of thought. It is not about
                mystifying a “true self” that needs to be rediscovered, but
                about a tradition of pragmatic anthropology, since, as Gernot
                Böhme has put it, “the path of anthropology in a pragmatic sense
                reveals the kind of human being you
                are.”<sup><a id="fnref:thirtythree" href="notes.xhtml#thirtythree">33</a></sup>
                In simpler terms, it’s about being honest to yourself. This
                honesty about how (and not necessarily
                what<sup><a id="fnref:thirtyfour" href="notes.xhtml#thirtyfour">34</a></sup>)
                we are, is important in many ways: for self-reflection (without
                which we won’t come to a new understanding of individuality or
                the ability to change ourselves), for authenticity in social
                relationships, and for constructiveness in social dialogue.
            </p>
            <p>
                4. Individuality guarantees creativity and ingenuity in daily
                life, in how we make decisions, solve problems, and organize.
                John Stuart Mill observed that life comes to a standstill “when
                it loses
                individuality.”<sup><a id="fnref:thirtyfive" href="notes.xhtml#thirtyfive">35</a></sup>
                There is no vital community without creativity.
            </p>
            <p>
                5. Individuality prohibits totalitarianism. It is the only
                guarantee for critical intervention. It is also the most
                effective social protection against the concentration of power
                and the institutionalization of authority. Max Stirner is a
                controversial thinker, but his reminder that the individual is
                “the irreconcilable enemy of any universality, meaning: any
                yoke” is
                important.<sup><a id="fnref:thirtysix" href="notes.xhtml#thirtysix">36</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                6. Individuality guarantees the diversity of talent and skill
                necessary to fulfill the plethora of social tasks. In any
                collective, various social tasks need to be met, and various
                roles need to be taken. If immanent diversity ought not give
                way to statist conformity, individuality must be defended,
                since, without it, a radiant and diverse social life is not
                possible.
            </p>
            <p>
                7. Finally, individuality is a requirement for social dynamism.
                I’ll try to explain, using an important terminological
                distinction in poststructuralist theory, namely, the one between
                subject and subjectivity. The subject is about rigid identity;
                subjectivity is about dynamic creation — or, as Gilles Deleuze
                has put it, “subjectivity is the production of forms of
                existence.”<sup><a id="fnref:thirtyseven" href="notes.xhtml#thirtyseven">37</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                Subjectivities don’t produce subjects. The subject stands in the
                way of subjectivity. The subject is an entity; subjectivity is a
                process. Subjectivity threatens the subject, whose aim it is to
                make life a prisoner. But subjectivity has nothing to do with
                arbitrary forms of identity. Arbitrary forms of identity provide
                a consumerist façade for the modern individual, allowing it to
                justify anything and turn hypocrisy into a
                virtue.<sup><a id="fnref:thirtyeight" href="notes.xhtml#thirtyeight">38</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                Social dynamism refers to something very different, namely, the
                individuals’ ability to account for and reflect on the dynamic
                character of reality. The reality we live in, socially and
                ecologically, is constantly changing, and therefore our position
                in it is changing, too. As responsible individuals, we have to
                reflect on these changes, redefine ourselves, and adapt our
                communities. Flexibility is a requirement for this. Active
                individuals will always stand in opposition to passive subjects
                of the state, no matter how much their passiveness is hidden
                behind a broad range of consumerist
                choices.<sup><a id="fnref:thirtynine" href="notes.xhtml#thirtynine">39</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                Following antiindividualistic ideals, we, as individuals, must
                understand ourselves as social singularities and not as a
                subject of the state. Social singularity is defined by
                nonconformism and a genuine opposition to universalism. We have
                looked at seven values that are essential for antistatist
                communities and that are dependent on embracing individuality:
                individual responsibility, self-respect, self-discovery,
                creativity and ingenuity, antitotalitarianism, immanent
                diversity, and social dynamism. These values cannot wait for
                some utopia to be realized, they need to be realized here and
                now, as we are trying to build antiindividualistic and
                antistatist forms of living. This requires distancing ourselves
                from indoctrinating powers and social norms, from mass media and
                “public opinion,” from “schools” of all sorts, as they pose a
                huge danger to individuality. If they manage to indoctrinate us,
                we lose our uniqueness. We must resist becoming the conformist
                mass being that the bourgeois-capitalist order wants us to be.
                Gilles Deleuze has put it thus: “The fight for subjectivity is
                fought by resisting both prevailing forms of submission: one
                consists of individualizing us according to the demands of
                power, the other of tying each individual to a predetermined
                identity. The fight for subjectivity thus presents itself as a
                right to difference, to variation, to
                metamorphosis.”<sup><a id="fnref:forty" href="notes.xhtml#forty">40</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                Individual rebellion must be understood in this light. It occurs
                when individuals dismantle conformist identities and become
                singularities. This must not be mistaken for individual_ism_.
                Individual rebellion interrupts the individualistic-conformist
                order of the state. It’s no coincidence that the lives of punks,
                squatters, and autonomists are frequently referred to as
                “chaotic” in bourgeois media, when they simply are creative.
            </p>
            <p>
                Individual rebellion demands a subversion of the modern
                individual much rather than being its ultimate
                glorification.<sup><a id="fnref:fortyone" href="notes.xhtml#fortyone">41</a></sup>
                It is unfair to accuse thinkers such as Julia Kristeva, who
                fought for singularity and against monolithic social entities,
                of
                “individualism.”<sup><a id="fnref:fortytwo" href="notes.xhtml#fortytwo">42</a></sup>
                Such attacks miss their target completely. All that Kristeva did
                was what all nonconformists do: she demanded individuality as a
                social singularity in the name of antiindividualistic and
                antistatist
                collectivity.<sup><a id="fnref:fortythree" href="notes.xhtml#fortythree">43</a></sup>
                Her struggle belonged to the ones described by Michel Foucault:
                “They are struggles which question the status of the individual:
                on the one hand, they assert the right to be different, and they
                underline everything which makes individuals truly individual.
                On the other hand, they attack everything which separates the
                individual, breaks his links with others, splits up community
                life, forces the individual back on himself, and ties him to his
                own identity in a constraining way. These struggles are not
                exactly for or against the ‘individual’ but rather they are
                struggles against the ‘government of
                individualization.’”<sup><a id="fnref:fortyfour" href="notes.xhtml#fortyfour">44</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                Antiindividualistic praxis does not aim to liberate the
                individual from the state; it is directed against the production
                of the individual by the state. To quote Foucault once more:
                “The conclusion would be that the political, ethical, social,
                philosophical problem of our days is not to try to liberate the
                individual from the state and from the state’s institutions but
                to liberate us both from the state and from the type of
                individualization which is linked to the
                state.”<sup><a id="fnref:fortyfive" href="notes.xhtml#fortyfive">45</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                This recalls a differentiation made by Peter Kropotkin already a
                century ago: “When the mutual aid institutions — the tribe, the
                village community, the guilds, the medieval city — began, in the
                course of history, to lose their primitive character, to be
                invaded by parasitic growths, and thus to become hindrances to
                progress, the revolt of individuals against these institutions
                took always two different aspects. Part of those who rose up
                strove to purify the old institutions, or to work out a higher
                form of commonwealth, based upon the same mutual aid principles.
                … But at the very same time, another portion of the same
                individual rebels endeavored to break down the protective
                institutions of mutual support, with no other intention but to
                increase their own wealth and their own
                powers.”<sup><a id="fnref:fortysix" href="notes.xhtml#fortysix">46</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                In contemporary terminology, this means that the individuals who
                demand more and more rights for themselves, such as
                libertarians, have nothing to do with individual protest for the
                sake of total liberation; they only try to maximize
                individualistic gains.
            </p>
            <p>
                Right-wing libertarians want to see the bourgeois individual
                reach its ultimate power. It is supposed to become so powerful
                that it no longer needs the state to protect it. Here, the
                rejection of the state stands for the rejection of all
                individual responsibility for the collective. Essentially, it
                becomes a glorification of social Darwinism, evident in large
                parts of the US militia movement.
            </p>
            <p>
                The intention of the antiindividualists is of a different kind:
                they want to break the abstract collective monopoly of the state
                to make way for lived collectivities. Their individual protest
                wants to escape the statist prison. While the rightist
                libertarian rejection of the state is tied to
                ultra-individualism, antisocialism, and Ramboism, the
                antiindividualistic rejection of the state stands for social
                responsibility, collective consciousness, and antifascism.
            </p>
            <p>
                Of course, this difference is expressed in praxis, too. Even if
                slogans like “No government is the best government!” might be
                heard from both sides, the individualistic and the
                antiindividualistic approach, respectively, lead to very
                different forms of praxis. While the individualists reject any
                measures taken by the state at any time, because they see their
                “individual freedom” threatened, antiindividualists know how to
                differentiate between statist surveillance, control, and
                indoctrination on the one hand, and social policies necessary
                under the given circumstances on the other. It is unfortunate
                that, today, certain social necessities can only be provided by
                the state. Antiindividualists won’t necessarily oppose welfare
                programs or subsidies for education, health care, public
                transport, and housing, if the only alternative lies in more
                private power, more egoistic competition, and less social
                commitment.
            </p>
            <p>
                This does not mean that antiindividualists don’t try to create
                alternatives to the social monopolies of the state. To the
                contrary, this very activity defines the second major difference
                to the antistatism from the right. While the latter, in Wild
                West romanticism, relies on the supposedly just power of the gun
                to get what you need, antiindividualist and antistatist
                resistance aims to create communities based on social
                responsibility and everyday collaboration, allowing a life
                independent of the state’s social policies, which demand
                individual submission rather than responsibility.
            </p>
            <p>
                There are numerous misunderstood individualists. We could think
                of people as different as Albert Camus or Chuck Bukowski. They
                had to share the fate of the dadaists or surrealists, who
                allegedly got themselves caught in contradictions between
                individual actionism and collective political commitment. It is
                sad that individual resistance in the spirit of collectivity
                often gets misunderstood as individualistic resistance. It is
                also sad that its revolutionary potential is often not
                recognized. And it is inexcusable that it has often been
                attacked as counter-revolutionary by leftists. This has done
                much harm to revolutionary movements. The ideals of the
                nonconformists are essential for an antifascist
                life.<sup><a id="fnref:fortyseven" href="notes.xhtml#fortyseven">47</a></sup>
                The answer to an individualistic society is not a totalitarian
                one (that’s just flipping the coin), but forms of existence in
                which individuality and collectivity complement each other.
                Individualism doesn’t end where conformism begins; it ends where
                individuality and collectivity merge and create new forms of
                community.
            </p>
            <p>
                Only fascism and totalitarianism need conformism.
                Antiindividualistic individuality is a requirement for vibrant
                and diverse collectivity, formed in daily praxis. It is embedded
                in a spirit of solidarity and antifascism. If these elements are
                missing, “individuality” can quickly deteriorate into classicist
                cults of the genius, bourgeois dandyism, or careerist yuppiedom.
                There won’t be individuality for all without social equality.
                This is what the anarchists remind us of.
            </p>
            <p>
                In this context, individual freedom has nothing to do with
                retreating to a secluded cell. Michel Bakunin: “For a human
                being to be free means to be recognized, regarded, and treated
                as such by a fellow human being, by all human beings. Freedom
                does not mean isolation but mutual recognition; it does not mean
                separation but
                unification.”<sup><a id="fnref:fortyeight" href="notes.xhtml#fortyeight">48</a></sup>
                Walter Benjamin (not an anarchist) has claimed that “since
                Bakunin, Europe has lacked a radical concept of
                freedom.”<sup><a id="fnref:fortynine" href="notes.xhtml#fortynine">49</a></sup>
            </p>
            <p>
                As Félix Guattari has noted, “the individuals have to develop
                solidarity and diversify at the same
                time.”<sup><a id="fnref:fifty" href="notes.xhtml#fifty">50</a></sup>
            </p>
        </article>
    </body>
</html>
