<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
    <head>
        <title>Notes</title>
        <link href="../style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    <body>
        <article>
            <h1>Notes</h1>
            <p>
                <a id="one" href="main.xhtml#fnref:one">1</a>.
                In German, there is a useful terminological distinction between
                Individuum und Einzelner. Einzelner refers to a single being
                (you, me, Peter, Paul, and Mary); it is a modest term with no
                ontological implications. Individuum, on the other hand,
                suggests that there is an essence to you, me, Peter, Paul, and
                Mary, that we are separated as ontological entities. There is no
                real equivalent for this distinction in English, as a commonly
                established word for Einzelner is lacking. When, in this text, I
                speak of the “individual” in an “antiindividualistic” sense, I
                mean Einzelner.
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="two" href="main.xhtml#fnref:two">2</a>.
                There are two historical texts of interest in this context: 1.
                The Right to be Greedy, written by a group named For Ourselves
                in 1974, brings together Karl Marx, Max Stirner, Raoul Vaneigem,
                and others, in an attempt to develop an “individualist
                communism” that is also a “communist individualism,” based on
                the conviction that “developed individuals make a richer
                community, and a richer community makes for richer individuals.”
                2. Max Stirner und der moderne Sozialismus, a 1906 essay by
                Austrian socialist Max Adler, attempting a similar combination
                of individualism and socialism: “Only those who do not
                understand individualism as creation of free personality, but as
                carelessness without personality (something no anarchist who
                wants to be taken seriously would do), will see it in opposition
                to socialism. In its true nature individualism is a basic
                principle of socialism, explicitly striving for the creation of
                a society in which the free development of each and every one is
                the precondition for the free development of all.”
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="three" href="main.xhtml#fnref:three">3</a>.
                Fodé Diawara, Le manifeste de l'homme primitif (1973).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="four" href="main.xhtml#fnref:four">4</a>.
                Michel Foucault: “We need to create new forms of subjectivity by
                rejecting the form of individuality forced upon us for
                centuries” (The Subject and Power, 1982). Ernesto Laclau and
                Chantal Mouffe: “What’s at stake her is the creation of a
                different individual, an individual that’s no longer constructed
                by the matrix of possessive individualism” (Hegemony and
                Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic Politics,
                1985).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="five" href="main.xhtml#fnref:five">5</a>.
                Karl Marx, Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts, 1844.
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="six" href="main.xhtml#fnref:six">6</a>.
                If we take, for example, Gottfried Stiehler’s Über den Wert der
                Individualität im Sozialismus, published in East Germany in
                1978, we are told that only socialism “allows for the creation
                of free individuality.” The how and why is explained by “the
                objective essence of socialism itself.” Stiehler adds: “The free
                and all-encompassing development of the individual is no mere
                rhetorical phrase in socialism, but an objective necessity.”
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="seven" href="main.xhtml#fnref:seven">7</a>.
                Margret, in: Der Stand der Bewegung (1995).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="eight" href="main.xhtml#fnref:eight">8</a>.
                Mikhail Bakunin, God and the State (1871).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="nine" href="main.xhtml#fnref:nine">9</a>.
                Erich Mühsam, Fanal (ca. 1928).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="ten" href="main.xhtml#fnref:ten">10</a>.
                Quoted from Daniel Guérin, Anarchism: From Theory to Practice
                (1970).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="eleven" href="main.xhtml#fnref:eleven">11</a>.
                Errico Malatesta, “Communism and Individualism” (1926).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="twelve" href="main.xhtml#fnref:twelve">12</a>.
                Errico Malatesta, “The Anarchist Revolution” (1924).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="thirteen" href="main.xhtml#fnref:thirteen">13</a>.
                Gilles Deleuze, Foucault (1986).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="fourteen" href="main.xhtml#fnref:fourteen">14</a>.
                Those who are interested could look at Gernot Böhme’s
                Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht (1985).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="fifteen" href="main.xhtml#fnref:fifteen">15</a>.
                Bakunin, God and the State. Bakunin explains further: “Human
                individuality, just like the individuality of the most
                motionless things, can’t be comprehended by science and hence
                doesn’t exist for it. That’s why the living individualities have
                to protect themselves (against science) not to be sacrificed to
                some abstraction like a guinea-pig; the same way they have to
                protect themselves against theology, politics, and law, all of
                which correspond to the abstract character of science and have
                the dangerous urge to sacrifice the individuals to some
                abstraction, disguised only by different names: theology calls
                it ‘divine truth,’ politics ‘the public good,’ law ‘justice.’”
                (ibid.)
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="sixteen" href="main.xhtml#fnref:sixteen">16</a>.
                This explains why there is no discussion here about the
                “essence” of the human being, about the “self,”
                “self-awareness,” or “personality”. These are very “heavy”
                terms. In this text, individuality refers to singularities
                (“individuations”), an integral part of life, which we
                experience as “facts.” Whether there is anything essential
                behind them – or what such an essence would consist of – is not
                the issue here. If someone demanded the necessity for a
                philosophical investigation into what “I” really means, we could
                answer with the German anthropologist Hans Peter Duerr, who
                wrote: “We simply learn to use the word ‘I’ through learning to
                partake in conversation, to address other people and to be
                addressed. And should someone ask skeptically, ‘How can you ever
                know what I mean when I say I?,’ the response would be: ‘Just as
                I know what you mean when you say you!’” (Ni dieu – ni metre,
                1985).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="seventeen" href="main.xhtml#fnref:seventeen">17</a>.
                Ralp Waldo Emerson, Self-Reliance (1841).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="eighteen" href="main.xhtml#fnref:eighteen">18</a>.
                Timothy Leary, Chaos &amp; Cyberculture (1994).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="nineteen" href="main.xhtml#fnref:nineteen">19</a>.
                See: Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus (1977).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="twenty" href="main.xhtml#fnref:twenty">20</a>.
                Carlos Marighela, Minimanual of the Urban Guerrilla (1969).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="twentyone" href="main.xhtml#fnref:twentyone">21</a>.
                Michel Foucault, The Use of Pleasure (1984).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="twentytwo" href="main.xhtml#fnref:twentytwo">22</a>.
                Craig O’Hara, The Philosophy of Punk (1992).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="twentythree" href="main.xhtml#fnref:twentythree">23</a>.
                Alex Comfort, preface in: Harold Barclay, People without
                Government (1982). A quote by Errico Malatesta explains how
                anarchists manage to overcome the difference between “egoistic”
                and “altruistic” behavior: “This now century-old dispute between
                ‘egoists’ and ‘altruists’ is in fact nothing but an unfortunate
                fight over words. It’s evident and admitted by all that anything
                we do voluntarily, we do to please our senses, or to follow our
                convictions. Even the purest martyr sacrifices himself because
                he experiences a deep satisfaction in the act of sacrifice,
                which rewards him plentifully for the experienced suffering;
                and if he gives his life consciously and voluntarily, then
                because, in his eyes, there is something of higher value than
                life. In a certain sense we can therefore, with no fear to go
                wrong, say that all humans are egoists. In colloquial speech,
                however — which, in my opinion, always has to be preferred, as
                long as it doesn’t cause misunderstanding — an egoist is someone
                who only thinks of himself and sacrifices the interests of
                others to his own, while an altruist is someone who is also —
                more or less strongly — concerned about the interests of others
                and does anything he possibly can to help them. In short, the
                egoist would be the worse egoist, and the altruist the better
                egoist — a question of words.” (Errico Malatesta, “The Moral
                Foundation of Anarchism,” 1922)
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="twentyfour" href="main.xhtml#fnref:twentyfour">24</a>.
                Léo Malet, Des kilomètres de linceuls (1955).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="twentyfive" href="main.xhtml#fnref:twentyfive">25</a>.
                Ernst Bloch, The Principle of Hope (1954).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="twentysix" href="main.xhtml#fnref:twentysix">26</a>.
                Dieter, in: Der Stand der Bewegung. – That the conditions for
                this aren’t the best in an individualized society since contact
                between individuals is loose enough to shed any social
                responsibility, is being pointed out by Hans Peter Duerr:
                “Certainly the individual today is connected to more people
                than ever before, yet the partners of interaction aren’t so much
                ‘whole personalities’ than ‘fragments of persons.’ What we know
                about each other is also rather fragmented.” (Hans Peter Duerr,
                Obszönitat und Gewalt, 1993).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="twentyseven" href="main.xhtml#fnref:twentyseven">27</a>.
                Concerning the paranoid character of fascist behavior, see
                Anti-Oedipus by Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari.
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="twentyeight" href="main.xhtml#fnref:twentyeight">28</a>.
                Gernot Böhme: “The sovereign human being distinguishes itself
                from the autonomous human being not by the increase of dominance
                over oneself or over others. Sovereignty rather means not
                feeling the need to rule over everything. I use the word in the
                way in which we call someone ‘sovereign’ who acknowledges the
                achievements of others, or who accepts defeat.” And:
                “Sovereignty consists especially in accepting the other. …
                Sovereign human beings know that they are not the whole, but a
                part of the whole, and they know how to relate to it.”
                (Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht)
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="twentynine" href="main.xhtml#fnref:twentynine">29</a>.
                Ice-T, The Ice Opinion (1994).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="thirty" href="main.xhtml#fnref:thirty">30</a>.
                Henry Rollins, One from None (1987).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="thirtyone" href="main.xhtml#fnref:thirtyone">31</a>.
                Beastie Boys, “The Update”, on: Ill Communication (1994).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="thirtytwo" href="main.xhtml#fnref:thirtytwo">32</a>.
                Rollins, One from None.
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="thirtythree" href="main.xhtml#fnref:thirtythree">33</a>.
                Böhme, Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht.
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="thirtyfour" href="main.xhtml#fnref:thirtyfour">34</a>.
                “‘Do you know at all what ‘I’ means when you say, ‘I know that
                x’ or ‘I go there now’?’ The response to this question can very
                well be a counter-question: ‘Do you ask a record whether it’s
                only a record, or a parrot whether it’s only a parrot?’” (Duerr,
                Ni dieu – ni mètre)
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="thirtyfive" href="main.xhtml#fnref:thirtyfive">35</a>.
                John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (1859).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="thirtysix" href="main.xhtml#fnref:thirtysix">36</a>.
                Max Stirner, The Ego and Its Own (1844).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="thirtyseven" href="main.xhtml#fnref:thirtyseven">37</a>.
                Gilles Deleuze, Pourparlers (1990). It is a misunderstanding to
                see Foucault’s later work in contradiction to his earlier texts.
                There is no “return to the subject.” When Foucault criticized
                “the subject,” he opposed the modern construction of the
                individual as an autonomous, rational being. He never criticized
                all forms of individuality, or all forms of “exploring oneself.”
                The History of Sexuality and other texts from that period are
                simply a continuation of Foucault’s earlier studies. Foucault
                himself said in an interview shortly before his death in 1984:
                “I don’t think that there is a big difference between these
                books and the former.” Or, as his friend and collaborator,
                Gilles Deleuze, put it: “It is dumb to see a return to the
                subject in this.” (Pourparlers)
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="thirtyeight" href="main.xhtml#fnref:thirtyeight">38</a>.
                Some “poststructuralist” thinkers found it difficult to free
                their theories from all (explicit or implicit) affinities to
                contemporary forms of domination within capitalist consumer
                culture. Lyotard’s elaborations on the “energetic devil
                capitalism,” or Deleuze’s and Guattari’s admiration of
                “capitalist schizo streams” appear increasingly problematic, and
                so do all theories about “nomadic subjects,” “permanent changes
                of identities,” or “individual multiplications.” That’s not
                because the ideas themselves are dumb, but because current
                social realities give them a meaning that takes away their
                revolutionary potential. Based on the thoughtless academic
                mélange of the terms poststructuralism and postmodernity (the
                latter has become so overexploited by now that a positive
                reference to it appears impossible; Umberto Eco was probably
                right when he called it a “passepartout term,” as it subsumes
                everything from truly critical poststructuralist theory to the
                lamest liberal nonsense — then again, we might still want to use
                it as a purely descriptive term for a social state of
                arbitrariness), we could say, somewhat paradoxically, that in
                many ways postmodern society has gone beyond poststructuralist
                theory (Jean Baudrillard might have been one of the first to
                realize this, even if his harsh criticism might appear arrogant,
                but … whatever). Postmodern society is characterized by
                secularization, mobility, pluralism, perpetual change, and
                multiple identities feeding the capitalist machine, which
                degrades all aspects of life to arbitrary consumer goods. This
                entails no plural deconstruction of the individual (which is an
                explicit poststructuralist goal) but conserves the individual as
                a requirement for the functioning of the economic apparatus. The
                arbitrary individual identities it creates allow the individuals
                to be more flexible, but only in superficial, bourgeois ways,
                beneficial to consumption and production. In that sense,
                postmodern culture truly becomes, in the words of Gilles
                Lipovetsky, a “vector of expansion for individualism” (L’ère du
                vide, 1983). So, as the poststructuralist attacks against modern
                individualism are absorbed by the individual’s mantle,
                poststructuralism loses its sting. We all know the result: a
                life, in which one can “do” (read: consume) anything, and in
                which ethical commitments count for nothing. This casts a dark
                shadow over the writings of many poststructuralist thinkers. It
                might not be their fault, but no theory can escape its social
                context. The problem is amplified by the fact that self-declared
                postmodern prodigies of poststructuralist thought occupy the
                public arena and offer a poststructuralism/postmodernism that
                has sometimes degenerated into intellectual apologism for
                parliamentarian democracy and the free market. What remains is a
                purely affirmative theory of individuality with no revolutionary
                potential — often enough, it no longer even has such intentions.
                I agree with the following analysis: “The postmodern subject,
                who is presumably left of subject-hood, seems to be mainly the
                personality constructed by and for technological capital,
                described by the Marxist literary theorist Terry Eagleton as a
                ‘dispersed, decentered network of libidinal attachments, emptied
                of ethical substance and psychical interiority, the ephemeral
                function of this or that art of consumption, media experience,
                sexual relationship, trend or fashion” (John Zerzan, Future
                Primitive, 1994). Seen from that angle,
                poststructuralist/post­modern theory can’t help us at all. I
                appreciate the poststructuralist critique of the subject. But
                radical theory needs to keep a clear distance to the logic of
                capital, and it must not turn into a justification for consumer
                culture without ethical and political principles. It must also
                go hand in hand with antiindividualistic subjectivities, not
                willing to compromise their principles.
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="thirtynine" href="main.xhtml#fnref:thirtynine">39</a>.
                A dynamism of this sort does not make individual values and
                principles relative. For antifascists, antifascist principles
                remain the same, regardless of how their individuality is
                defined and lived at any given time. The ways of how we express
                our values and principles in everyday life might change, but not
                the values and principles themselves. And just as this kind of
                dynamism doesn’t make our values and principles relative, it
                doesn’t make their expressions in everyday life relative either.
                Political actions that are right today can be wrong tomorrow.
                But if they were right at the time they occurred, no future
                developments can make them wrong. Changing the ways in which we
                express our values and principles can only make them relative if
                we understand change as an indication of error. But there’s no
                reason for this, unless we want to perpetuate the basis of
                theoretical and practical terror created by Platonic, occidental
                philosophy. At the end of the day, change is all we have, as the
                subversive intellectual forces of ancient Greece already
                confirmed: Heracliteans, Sophists, and Pyrrhonists. We can
                summarize this in the trivial observation that, in order to have
                a good life, it is right to heat in the winter but wrong to heat
                in the summer. That doesn’t make either wrong per se, it just
                means that people live according to the conditions they find
                themselves in. I elaborate on this because, in the name of
                postmodernity, we often find justifications of individual
                passivity like the following: without a subject there can’t be
                any principles; no actions are the right ones; those who employ
                principles or make demands are fascists; antifascism, therefore,
                consists of having no principles and taking no action. In
                reality, this is the end of revolutionary politics; it is the
                “repressive tolerance” Herbert Marcuse warned us about: “I call
                this non-partisan tolerance ‘abstract’ or ‘pure’ inasmuch as it
                refrains from taking sides — but in doing so it actually
                protects the already established machinery of discrimination.”
                (Repressive Tolerance, 1965) There are no revolutionary politics
                without a commitment to strong values and principles. Not least
                today, with people giving in to an irresponsible ecstasy of
                consumerism, it would prove fatal to give this up. Any
                antiindividualistic subjectivities we create have to be dynamic
                in the sense described above, while remaining strong and
                uncompromising at the same time. Dynamism must not be confused
                with arbitrariness, otherwise we’ll rob ourselves of all
                political possibilities. I want to underline, however, that this
                doesn’t mean that I second critiques of poststructuralism
                suggesting that it destroys all possibilities of political
                intervention by attacking the subject. The subject in capitalism
                can indeed be seen as the prison of the individual. It stands
                against transformatory action, since it allows the state to
                reduce the individual to its, well, subject. We require active
                subjectivities with strong principles, not subjects. There’s a
                difference. There is a soft variety of the subject’s political
                defense against poststructuralist theory, pointing at the
                pragmatic relevance of being recognized as subjects by the law
                within the modern state system. This is a question that has, for
                example, been raised by feminists who first want to attain full
                subjecthood as women before focusing on the subject’s
                deconstruction. This can’t be disregarded. In fact, a lot of
                struggles for the recognition as a “full subject” are of great
                importance. But they will remain purely reformist if not linked
                to a radical agenda. For some, this might not be a problem. If,
                for them reforms are enough, they are enough. But for those with
                different ambitions, who don’t want to have any of
                bourgeois-capitalist society and the modern individual, it won’t
                be. This means that they will have to attack the modern subject
                on an ideological level — which, I believe, can easily go
                together with struggles for attaining subject status on a
                pragmatic basis. The stronger version of the subject’s political
                defense against poststructuralism, however, argues that this is
                not possible, and indeed paradoxical, because we can only act as
                subjects, and would thus condemn ourselves to non-action by
                attacking the subject. Look, for example, at people calling it a
                “contradiction” that Gayatri Spivak would translate Derrida
                while being a women’s right activist in India. This makes little
                sense. Whoever makes such arguments seems to have missed the
                point. They confuse concrete individuals with their abstract
                identifications, do not differentiate between the subject and
                subjectivities, and draw the ridiculous picture of a
                poststructuralism supposedly claiming that there are no single
                (individual) human beings. I don’t want my critique of
                poststructuralism to be confused with this. I don’t want to
                suggest that the dissolution of the subject means that we can’t
                act politically anymore; but its superficial pseudo-dissolution
                becomes a justification for not having to act politically
                anymore.
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="forty" href="main.xhtml#fnref:forty">40</a>.
                Deleuze, Foucault.
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="fortyone" href="main.xhtml#fnref:fortyone">41</a>.
                This is why we always have to consider the context in which
                supposedly individualistic battle cries appear. Even a line like
                “Do you trust what I trust? Me, myself, and I” can simply be a
                non-conformist commitment. (From the Metallica song “Eye of the
                Beholder” — on …And Justice for All, 1988.)
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="fortytwo" href="main.xhtml#fnref:fortytwo">42</a>.
                See, for example, Toril Moi’s Sexual/Textual Politics (1985).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="fortythree" href="main.xhtml#fnref:fortythree">43</a>.
                The enemy confirms the subversive potential of this kind of
                individualism: “This sort of ‘individualism’ not only has
                nothing to do with true individualism but may indeed prove a
                grave obstacle to the smooth working of an individualist system.
                It must remain an open question whether a free or
                individualistic society can be worked successfully if people are
                too ‘individualistic’ in the false sense, if they are too
                unwilling voluntarily to conform to traditions and conventions.”
                (Richard von Hayek, “Individualism: True and False”, 1945)
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="fortyfour" href="main.xhtml#fnref:fortyfour">44</a>.
                Foucault, The Subject and Power.
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="fortyfive" href="main.xhtml#fnref:fortyfive">45</a>.
                ibid.
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="fortysix" href="main.xhtml#fnref:fortysix">46</a>.
                Peter Kropotkin, Mutual Aid (1902).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="fortyseven" href="main.xhtml#fnref:fortyseven">47</a>.
                Two books that write a history of resistance in the 20th-century
                along these lines are Stewart Home’s The Assault on Culture
                (1988), and Greil Marcus’s Lipstick Traces (1989).
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="fortyeight" href="main.xhtml#fnref:fortyeight">48</a>.
                Bakunin, God and the State.
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="fortynine" href="main.xhtml#fnref:fortynine">49</a>.
                Walter Benjamin, Surrealism (1929). Despite anarchist
                sympathies, one must not be biased and unfair. Marx understood
                freedom in a similar way, or, at least, criticized “bourgeois
                freedom” from the same perspective: “Only in the community with
                others, each individual has the means to develop its talents;
                only in community, personal freedom becomes a possibility. … In
                true community, the individual reaches freedom in and by
                association.” (Karl Marx/Friedrich Engels, The German Ideology,
                1846). In the 1843 essay On the Jewish Question, Marx developed
                a well grounded critique of human rights that has not become any
                less relevant today: “Above all, we note the fact that the
                so-called rights of man, the droits de l’homme as distinct from
                the droits du citoyen, are nothing but the rights of a member of
                civil society — i.e., the rights of egoistic man, of man
                separated from other men and from the community. … None of the
                so-called rights of man, therefore, go beyond egoistic man,
                beyond man as a member of civil society — that is, an individual
                withdrawn into himself, into the confines of his private
                interests and private caprice, and separated from the community.
                In the rights of man, he is far from being conceived as a
                species-being; on the contrary, species-life itself, society,
                appears as a framework external to the individuals, as a
                restriction of their original independence. The sole bond
                holding them together is natural necessity, need and private
                interest, the preservation of their property and their egoistic
                selves.”
            </p>
            <p>
                <a id="fifty" href="main.xhtml#fnref:fifty">50</a>.
                Félix Guattari, The Three Ecologies, 1989.
            </p>
        </article>
    </body>
</html>
