<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
    <head>
        <title>Preface to this Edition</title>
        <link href="../style/main.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    <body>
        <article>
            <h1>Preface to this Edition</h1>
            <p>
                This text is an English translation of the key chapter of a
                thesis I wrote in German as a philosophy student in the early
                1990s. At the time, I tried to align anarchist beliefs with
                postmodern/poststructuralist theory and cultural studies. Not
                long thereafter, I lost interest in these pursuits. Today, I’m
                baffled by the nonsense that has been produced (and continuous
                to be produced) under the “post” banner. However, I still
                believe that the theorists who inspired these fields (often
                against their will) made valuable contributions to the history
                of ideas and intervened at a time when social sciences and
                humanities needed a breath of fresh air.
            </p>
            <p>
                The thesis in question was called Jenseits von Staat und
                Individuum. Studien zu alteritärer Individualität (Beyond the
                State and the Individual: Studies on Alternative Individuality).
                In 2007, a revised version with a less pretentious subtitle
                (Individuality and Autonomous Politics) was published by Unrast
                Verlag. I have, at times, called this my most underrated book.
                That’s tongue-in-cheek, but even if there has been an
                appreciative audience, it has always remained limited. I
                believe, though, that the book targets a problem that has only
                grown since then, namely: how are politics based on collective
                values possible in an individualized world? Especially, when we,
                the “subjective forces” of the revolution, have a hard time
                escaping our own individualization as well. The issue is very
                personal, as my political beliefs revolve around mutual aid and
                communal efforts, while I find alone time and personal
                independence very precious. Is this a contradiction that can be
                resolved? Are there ways to reconcile these apparent opposites?
                Or are our collective aspirations doomed?
            </p>
            <p>
                In Jenseits von Staat und Individuum, these questions were
                mainly discussed with references to popular culture, everything
                from literary classics to Italo Westerns to straight edge. Yet,
                the chapter “Das Vermächtnis des Anarchismus: Skizze einer
                antiindividualistischen Individualität” (The Legacy of
                Anarchism: Sketching an Antiindividualistic Individuality) tried
                to tackle them theoretically.
            </p>
            <p>
                In 2003, I translated this chapter into English and published it
                as a pamphlet under the title “Antiindivdualistic Individuality:
                A Concept” in the Alpine Anarchist series. Alpine Anarchist
                Productions was a DIY publishing project I ran at the time. As
                with most Alpine Anarchist releases, I used a pseudonym for this
                pamphlet: Teoman Gee, the most common one.
            </p>
            <p>
                In 2007, I stopped releasing pamphlets and moved Alpine
                Anarchist Productions online. While I uploaded a fair number of
                the pamphlets I had released, I never uploaded
                “Antiindividualistic Individuality”, because I was unhappy with
                parts of the translation.
            </p>
            <p>
                It was therefore a very pleasant surprise when, in July 2023,
                the editors of Laniakea Books got in touch and expressed
                interest in rereleasing the pamphlet. This goes to show that
                even pamphlets released in very small numbers can have
                long-lasting effects. (Shout out to all the zine makers out
                there who still stick to the trade!) So, I gave the translation
                an overhaul and handed it to the Laniakea folks to produce the
                booklet you’re holding in your hands (or peruse online). There
                are features that you wouldn’t find in current texts of mine
                (quite a bit of the wording and neverending notes!), but I
                didn’t change any of that. The document stands for its time.
                Many thanks for the opportunity to see it in print again!
            </p>
            <p>
                — Gabriel Kuhn, Stockholm, August 2023
            </p>
        </article>
    </body>
</html>
